[Music]
okay we'll get started
my name is Mike Frank I'm the director
here Hoover's Washington DC office and
want to welcome everybody quick reminder
you can turn off cell phones that would
be appreciated welcome today we have a
great book event you all know but this
is the book it's the case for trump by
our own senior fellow Victor Davis
Hanson we were checking today on Amazon
and and this is now the number one book
I believe in all of Amazon for American
history it's the number two book on
I think it's politics and number overall
for everything including recipe books
and self-help books everything is number
eight and it came online publication
date was Tuesday
it's already sold about 40,000 copies so
this thing is gangbusters and we're
really honored to have the author here
today so let me give a quick
introduction to Victor Davis Hanson
first and most important to us he is a
senior fellow at the Hoover Institution
we're out in California if you don't
know part of Stanford and we're proud to
have him as one of our most popular and
most important senior fellows
he's also the Wayne and Marsha busk
distinguished fellow in history at
Hillsdale College professor of classics
emeritus at California State University
at Fresno where he founded the classics
department great story behind that BA
from the University of California Santa
Cruz PhD in classics from Stanford in
2007 he was awarded the highest I think
it's the highest civilian award any
president can bestow upon an American
citizen the National Humanities medal
and the following year he won another
very very important prestigious award
the Bradley prize from the Bradley
Foundation colonist and National Review
Online should be media services he's
published pretty much everywhere too
long of a list to mention he's read and
they're edited over 20 books
including Wars of the ancient Greeks a
war like no other how the Athenians and
Spartans fought the Peloponnesian War
the Savior generals how five commanders
saved wars that were lost from ancient
Greece to Iraq and his latest book which
I also highly recommend the second world
wars how the first global conflict was
fought and what and I'll just going to
do a quick segue to say answer requested
and I had and I've had for a long time
reading his columns in National Review
and American Conservative and so on why
would such a renowned classicist want to
engage in current political and
historical events as Victor Davis Hanson
has so let me just read a couple of
quotes from him from the 2007 National
Humanities medal ceremony and one from
the Bradley award at first a tribute
from Donald Kagan he L classicist who is
top of the field as well
Hansen's work on the role of the small
family farmer in the development of
democracy is the most important work in
Greek history in my lifetime
nobody told that story before Hansen and
its significance is hard to exaggerate
now from Hansen himself studying the
classics for eight years both here and
abroad and teaching them for 20 years
all reiterated the sense that human
nature was unchanging and the human
ordeal predictable whether it was
working on a farm or reading Sophocles
or the Siddha teased the message kept
being reiterated in different ways
nothing really changes and another quote
I don't see enough people standing up to
defend the West we don't realize how
tenuous this legacy is and how it has to
be transmitted from generation to
generation the nature of man doesn't
change and that's reassurance as we know
the necessary conditions that can save
him from himself
the legacy of the West is a guidance
system through the natural perils of
human nature and behavior and finally
from the Bradley prize if we are to keep
what we inherited we must condemn
religious intolerance wherever we see it
pseudoscience wherever we hear it an
impossible utopian demands upon
wherever we read of them and to do so
with the newfound sense of humility and
recognition of our own limitations of
all the traits that we prize courage and
expression at this hour is most critical
which I think forms the basis for why he
would engage writing the the case for
Trump and I'll say one last thing before
I turn it over to Professor Hanson you
know he dedicates the book to the
deplorable so professor Hanson welcome
what I I came here to hear questions
from you and from Michaels so I'm just
going to give you a five to seven-minute
synopsis of the book I hope I have
courage because I was called a Nazi
today in the modern Heidegger in an
article and there's more of that to come
what I thought was unique about Donald
Trump in 2015/16 is that he was running
against the most gifted Republican feel
that I'd seen in my lifetime 16 very
qualified people and yet he was able not
only to defeat them but to craft an
agenda that was 60 or 70 percent
Orthodox Republican which would not
necessarily have won in the general
election given that the Republican Party
had lost five out of six of the last
popular votes in presidential elections
and had not won 51% since 1988 when
George HW Bush did it and yet had been
very successful winning over 1,100
offices at the state and local level
during the Obama administration so there
was something wrong with that message at
least in giving a conservative a chance
to win the presidency so what did he add
to it he had these strange issues I
don't think they're strange but people
did that solvent he was known was
necessary and impossible without a
secure border and that you would not be
able to assimilate integrate and
intermarry immigrants unless they came
in and measured diverse legal and
muriatic fashion and then the second was
that everybody talked about China
but they did it with a wink and nod as
if its hegemony the arc of history was
all going to be Chinese you couldn't
stop them and yet Trump notice that it
still at this late date about one
Chinese citizen produces excuse me one
American citizen if we can use that
rough rubric produces about three times
of goods and services which is Chinese
counterpart China threatens the world
with one carrier group maybe we have ten
to eleven so Trump suggested that we
calibrate our attitude on mercantile ISM
technological appropriation dumping
copyright and patent infringement and a
part of a larger effort to say that
China is not the fated leader of the
world and if it were to be the fated
lead leader of the world things would be
very bad for the world a third issue was
he even though that globalization had
been a bicoastal phenomenon and that
people were almost confusing cause and
effect I quoted a lot of things in the
book that people in the Midwest these
cities that had been part of the Rust
Belt it was almost as if the people
themselves drove industry away rather
than industry was driven away by cosmic
factors and they suffered for but he
made the argument that you could
reindustrialize or use manufacturing or
raise workers where wages or get
unemployment down further and that this
was going to these groups were gonna
experience a renaissance that was quite
striking quite striking in addition to
immigration and trade and china he also
added something that was I think caused
him trouble later on but the at least
ostensibly said we're not going to
engage in what he called optional
military engagements where we weren't
not able and I'm paraphrasing now to
translate battlefield or tactical
success into strategic resolution
Afghanistan Libya Iraq etc and then he
made all of these arguments in a
geographical context
in other words you said that they're
tailor-made to Wisconsin Michigan Iowa
Ohio Pennsylvania North Carolina places
like Florida and then the message was
that the Obama model that with the new
changing demography in new identity
politics that this that was the wave of
the future and that the alienation of
the white working-class are just the
working-classes
would not matter very much what the
record turnout of identity politics
groups could be passed on to a 69 year
old multi-millionaire like Hillary
Clinton and I don't think don't believe
that was true so once he won then people
had warned us on the right he would
either govern as a liberal he would
appoint his sister for example the
Supreme Court or that he would get us
into a war and you know Rocketman and
all of that stuff or he would crash the
economy if if we just take the name
Trump out of it and we look at his
foreign policy and you look at visa V
Russia for example he beefed up
sanctions he arm the Ukrainians he got a
rid of this idea that you could have a
wink and a nod good behavior collusion
with Putin he started the mechanics of
restoring missile defense
he upped our efforts to increase missile
defense and he was it was much tougher
at that then the Obama reset had been
envisioned if you look at China I
mentioned China it's a new approach
whatever happens in North Korea I don't
think they're sending missiles into our
allies airspace or testing nuclear
weapons with a frequency that they used
to he got out of the Iran deal there
were over 250 examples of Iranian
aggression hazing sending missiles over
flights of buzzing ships before he took
office there were I think two in 2018
and the Straits of Hormuz if you look at
NATO he said a lot of reckless things
but the fact is that the NATO
country's knew that only six of them
were meeting their 2% guidelines and I
think now they've collectively committed
to a hundred million dollars a hundred
billion and additional resources so
foreign policy I think the has been
successful the economy has been has been
successful culturally psychologically on
these other issues I don't think anybody
thought that he would have point and
rushed through with the aid of the
Congress in such a heroic way by Mitch
McConnell but he's got more conservative
justice through quicker than any other
Republican president I don't think there
will be a nomination up such as a David
sooner or an attempted nomination I
carry it Meyers without editorial
ization I just think he's gonna go that
route
keeps having problems at the border
largely because people feel that he's an
extremist right now and he's under
stress and that if you're gonna cross
the border illegally and do it in mass
now's the time to do it before it's
clear who wins this battle to secure the
border but he's he's making efforts and
it really translates to me when I see
Hispanic people that live next to who
tell me for the first time in their life
they have more than one employer trying
to buy for their labor and they
attributed that to this record low
Hispanic unemployment and forces at a
border that are discouraging illegal
alternatives to their own labor and I
think Trump and this is counterintuitive
and maybe I don't know Herot heretical
but I think he will get 35 to 45 percent
of the Hispanic vote because just for
that reason and if he's wise and he can
can emphasize that there's a lot of
biases coming out from this new wing of
the Democratic Party especially
anti-catholic bias and and not just
partial birth abortion but virtual
infanticide and I'll just finish very
quickly as what about 2020 in 2016 a
number of people voted for him despite
Trump they voted against Hillary not the
majority but a soul
sizeable number I think there's going to
be a that effect to a greater degree in
2020 he's going to be able to offer the
argument that whatever he is he's not
socialism and he might be the only thing
between you and socialism only because
if you look at that new basket of issues
that the left of the Democratic Party is
trying to tar their mainstream
partial-birth abortion if not
infanticide medical care for all a
wealth tax seventy to ninety percent top
rate the new Green Deal the abolition of
ice they're not just not billing anymore
walls but maybe even tearing down the
walls Leto said on the order those are
not polling 51% and if that is the issue
that these are the issues that are
forced upon the Democratic nominee it'll
be something I think close to what
happened 1972 if not 1984 without I'm
going to turn over you okay thank you
yeah in one of one of your chapters you
you start with a quote from Joseph
Epstein and I'll read it they don't ask
you to elaborate a little bit on it he
he wanted his son so I approve of almost
everything he meaning Trump is done my
son remarked and I disapprove of almost
everything he is said there's a
cognitive dissonance there than a lot of
people that I know have been grappling
with who are conservative in their
policy orientations and a little bit
frustrated at the style in tweeting and
so on that accompanies this president
and you have a very good long discussion
about how to how that plays out and some
of the policy issues that have been
successful and so on could just
elaborate a little bit more on that
aspect that was the the central thesis
of the sort right I guess we're not
supposed to use the word never Trump but
that was their thesis that issues that
they used to be for and still are for
they can no longer promote under the
aegis of Donald Trump because his
fingerprints have so tarnished those
issues that they've now opposed him and
they've opposed him
on the grounds that his character is
such that it nullifies the message the
problem I have with that is that for
that to be true there has to be some
corollaries one of them would be that
although he's had no wave first present
with either without military present
politics perience he has to have said
things and done things that we've never
seen before the president and that has
to accommodate the idea that we live in
a era of social media a non restrained
press in the sense of ninety percent of
it according to show and Steve Sorenson
centers anti-trump and the internet and
by that and I don't think that thesis
has been proven I could I just like to
give you three or four tall these
thoughts out there if Harry Truman lived
today under the circumstances of
Trumpets engaging in I think we would
probably have a non-stop prosecutor like
mr. Muller investigating all of his
Kansas City ties to what was basically a
mafia operation that produced moment we
would probably be told that he was so
incompetent that Roosevelt only met him
one time before he came present he had
no idea what the atomic bomb Manhattan
Project was when he walked into office
and then he wrote a letter to a critic
of his daughter's concert and he said
essentially he was going to beat him up
and then where his genitals were there
would be nothing if you want it if you
think well that was an aberration you
could say that FDR
I think accurately Anna Roosevelt was
arranging affairs while he was president
with Lucy Mercer although the last years
of his presidency and he had over two
hundred forty top diastolic distillate
pressure blood pressure and yet that was
kidding from the public because they
thought they could keep him alive enough
to win the presidency and forty four and
keep a democratic continue that kind of
pales to all questions about Trump's
lipitor or whether he takes some some
additive or what we talked about during
the twenty five that meant twenty-fifth
amendment so far as I know mr. Trump has
not taken his phallus out and said is
anybody men have any
like this in a way that's been reported
by some LBJ biography he doesn't he
doesn't have memo he doesn't have his
people he doesn't issue memos why he's
defecating on the toilet
his aides and nobody I think I'm I think
we're gonna get a lot of memoirs about
his Randy past but I don't think a
nineteen-year-old working now on the
White House is gonna later write a
memoir how she was deflowered by Donald
Trump and the presidential bed the way
Mimi Alfred Alfred said that she was by
JFK I'm not saying that this to quote a
classical argument is valid that they do
it to I'm just asking for a little
humility and perspective and tome Truman
left office the most popular unpopular
president history until George Bush and
he did things that people thought were
absolutely atrocious at the time he
integrated the Armed Forces without
really talking to the Pentagon he fired
National Herald Douglas MacArthur and he
said I should have fired that SOB a long
time ago let that be known to the press
he turned on the Roosevelt State
Department said that's sob lied to me
Stalin we're not gonna have any more
relations worse and he started the
doctrine of containment
worst of all Dean Acheson George
Marshall begged him not to recognize
Israel he did to absolute pour among
people in the permanent bureaucracy so I
think we all need to take a little take
a deep breath and look at this
historical framework and this strange
electronic lynch mob that we're in today
and I think if you do that doesn't mean
that Donald Trump's a saint but he's not
an aberration either and I just like to
finish with one thing we we still don't
know in America the relationship between
public behavior and private behavior or
public morality we're not religious
people that's for the God and his
representatives on earth to to
adjudicate but this idea that everything
is canceled out by a person without
character I won't get into what the
Greek word character really meant
it's been this quoted in relation to
Trump but I will say that had George
Patton he was taken off for one year
after his Sicily victory because he
reportedly slapped the soldiery which he
shouldn't have done and you could make
the argument that a lot of thousands of
people died when he was not allowed to
lead the assault right from the Normandy
beaches and you can make the argument
that at the time he was leading the
Third Army to the Rhine he was
conducting an affair with his Stepney's
in Paris if if we had said my god what a
pervert and we had lifted that command
out of him and let home our Bradley have
total control and picked a better third
army commander I think we have lost
another hundred thousand casualties I
can make that argument for a uncouth
person like Curtis LeMay or William
Tecumseh Sherman again it's not an
argument for bad character it's just an
argument for where humans are not
divinities one other question then we'll
turn it to the audience
everyone has cards in front of you so we
will have someone come and pick them up
maybe over the next few minutes to those
who've already filled them out and I'll
work through them for the rest of the
questions but this question is you have
well I think my favorite chapter in the
book was the one on Trump and whether
he's a hero you know and the way you
draw upon Greek literature and mythology
and so on but also westerns the films
and how the heroes are sort of
ambivalent or anti-heroes in many cases
and what happens to them at the end and
then you related to some of the things
going on with the president could you
maybe elaborate a little bit on that
that's a real teaser to making guys read
further and further further into the
book well I wanted to get the reader I
didn't know what references would
resonate with the reader so I used all
of them I don't think very many people
said that's it he's soft the police Ajax
but you read Sophocles Ajax all Ajax
does is whine and say that the armor of
Achilles should have gone to him with
the deep state Agamemnon
mentally as we read the whole deal and
he really did win the war and he gets no
credit and why is this and he has a
valid argument but you want to say be
quiet Ajax the world's not fair get on
with your lawyer but I also mentioned
people such as Dirty Harry I even
mentioned taken I tried to mention that
brilliant film that was on appreciated
men on fired but Denzel what is in El
Washington zinnia and then I
concentrated on the stories that some of
us grew up with on the big screen Ethan
Edwards and The Searchers Shane lil Kane
in High Noon Magnificent Seven there is
a sort of a trait that the community in
that genre the sodbusters they be they
have an existential enemy they're
usually cattle Baron's or Bandidos but
they don't have the wherewithal or they
don't have they're in a situation where
they can't address the existential
threat and they don't have alternative
methods the law enforcement so they
invite someone in or if someone happens
upon them or accidentally bumps into
them in the case of Shane and there's
sort of worry they're dubious of their
past they don't seem to be credible and
yet they have I think a set of skills
it's one person put it that could come
to be of their benefit so whether it's
finding Natalie Wood and the searchers
or whether it's getting rid of for
people who are terrorizing the town and
high noon or whether it's getting a
while up wallak out of the hair of poor
villagers with a magnificent seven they
accomplish the task but as they become
successful in that endeavor people start
to have a margin of luxury they start to
think well things are getting a little
better I really didn't like the way he
said that I really didn't like the way
he did that and then they start to
realize as Curtis LeMay said what if if
even if we win the war I'm going to be
considered a war criminal they realized
that society is going to reach a point
where they're going to have the luxury
of renouncing the very person who was
very instrumental in them sort of what
Henry Kissinger said or at least he was
alleged said in an interview late not
too long ago I think
the Atlantic where he said every once in
a while man like Trump comes in and he
disrupts things any questions st. you're
not supposed to question and that has
utility it reminds me finally of that
scene where Shane is just about ready to
take out Jack Palance but he says
somebody says it might be this guy Jack
Wilson and change said Wilson what he
looked like and then a self-righteous of
sod-buster who's just about ready to be
saved and then ensuing gunfight says I
don't like gun firing I don't like the
idea you might know him Shane is if go
out and get rid of the problem and get
the hell out of here and don't ever tell
anybody that we you work for me hunson
that's sort of the attitude one thing I
like about professor Hanson is being a
classicist and being able to conjure up
all those analogies but also in the book
he references one of my favorite movies
not a Western but Caddyshack and
analogizes compares Trump to the Rodney
Dangerfield character in a county Shaq
could you say one or two sentences about
that cuz I just I was cheering out loud
when I read that part well I thought
that you remember the is it Ted Knight
character he had small smiles as well I
thought he was more like Hillary Clinton
or maybe the establishment that Trump
had the people I don't think I'm not
trying to be a toady but there are
elements of Trump's character that
people miss that he's getting more and
more self-deprecating some when he said
that if I had I drank alcohol I'd be a
disaster them or he's made fun of his
hair and whatever we think about him or
you think about him or his critics think
of him I don't think Donald Trump in
2020 will suddenly discover duck honey
and put on camouflage I don't think he's
going to go in the inner city and drop
his geez the way Brock Obama did I don't
think he's gonna go into a bowling alley
and drink Boilermakers as Hillary did
and say you all whatever he is he's
gonna have a Queens accent he's gonna
black shiny shoes and that mile long tie
in that suit wherever he is and that I
think helps explain why the
establishment missed
when they kept saying John case eats the
populace he's the populace not gonna
calm billionaires can't be populist and
they didn't understand that populism is
an infant it's a state of mind and many
it's an empathy and how we got in the
sickness paradox I can't explain but we
had somebody who supposedly can be very
cruel and he can be and yet he has an
empathy when he talks about our workers
our vets our lay the workers or even my
favorite I'm gonna restore big beautiful
coal when he went to Appalachia that's a
much more empathetic statement they
Hillary Clinton says I'm gonna put a lot
of you out of work we have a first round
of cards with questions I mean a couple
of them get at a related point but it's
not directly on with respect to
President Trump at all I think it's
important what can be done about the
fact that students are not being taught
history but rather politically correct
points of view and what can be done to
promote the classics to our youth
related any advice there yeah I've been
a book about that who killed Homer and
it's all about rewards and punishments
I think Orwell said something that's
applicable that most academics have it
paid better they beat fascists and by
that I mean that 95 percent of the
professor or left-wing and they're and
they are not the classical liberal I I
was taught by people who voted for Adlai
Stevenson but they may have been left
wing but they were disinterested and
they were scholarly and had you taken 40
percent of their time and devoted it to
diversity and gender and all that stuff
they wouldn't have known they wouldn't
have been able to teach us how to read
Homer at site or how to read and write
in black in Greek so but this new
generation was taught by the people my
generation who talked we were sort of
Democrats taught by Adlai Stevenson
Democrats and then we taught socialist
and now socialists or teaching
communists almost
so there isn't there isn't anybody and
how do you stop that will the rewards if
you're in a department you say something
you're gonna be fired if you say if you
walk across the Stanford campus and you
want to give a lecture and say there is
no such thing as manmade global warming
I mean there probably is but not if you
said something like I don't think the
government in a cost-benefit analysis
can really stop global warming in a way
that might not cripple the economy that
would be an arguable position you
wouldn't be allowed to say it if you
said I want to borrow ban most abortions
you wouldn't been able to say if you say
I do not want anymore theme houses safe
spaces censorship like trigger one you
wouldn't be able to say it
pretty sure you wouldn't so how do you
stop that and the answer is it alumni
have to stop giving money to
universities that's not targeted that's
that's just that's giving drugs to an
addict you they have to give money and
say this is for this particular purpose
not that it won't be abused and
misappropriated but there's less chance
I think tenure has to be recalibrated as
a series of contracts for years contract
you do this at the end of your contract
you'll be given another not lifetime
tenure I think that the school of
education could be phased out by
offering a person who graduates if you
really want to get a teaching credential
maybe you can go to school of education
but if you just spend a year and get an
academic MA the way a junior college
teacher is in you can teach high school
or grammar school without a credential
as long as you have an academic would be
much better for the students and and
finally I think the government's got to
get out of this student debts trap
because once you start guaranteeing
student loans you're creating these
perpetual students sort of life of Julia
pyjama boy profiles where they go to
school for three units kind of sort of
do it the graduation rates are going
from four years six years to eight years
the debt piles up and the universities
have a guaranteed stream of cash so not
only do they have lock climbing walls
and boutique Club Med dorms now but
they've got less and less teaching
more and more diversity czars and
therapeutic waste of money and that
there's no incentive for them to cut
back as long as the poor student very
funny how a liberal institution can be
so illiberal I wish we just had a law
like car salesman or subject to you go
to college and they say this is how much
money you're borrowing this is how much
you're going to owe if you major in this
thing these are the job opportunities
and major in this field these are the
job opportunities and by law I have to
apprise you that you're going to do a
quarter million dollar debt just like
when you buy a semi-truck or something
we don't do that question about Trump
and Russia why do something that jump is
so pro-russian when he is arming
Ukrainian with with lethal defensive
weapons and it's hard to read the rest
is but basically he's done a lot of
things policy wise that you could
interpret clearly as being very hawkish
relative to the u.s. relationship yet
he's criticized for yeah yeah I think it
has a lot to do with the 2016 election I
don't think anybody calibrated the sheer
pure bewilderment what happened after
the 92 election the night of the
election the New York Times said there
was gonna be eight to seven and twelve
percent chance of Trump winning Nate
Silver was a very astute a pollster a
demographer or whatever analyst was kind
of criticized for saying I think he said
Trump had a twenty six percent chance
that was heresy and so people were
shocked and when when Trump sort of said
things joked about things like maybe we
can get Putin to find out where the
missing emails or things like that that
became more and more fodder and so and
this was during the campaign I know that
people argue that the dossier wasn't
released until January by BuzzFeed but
remember people like Michael Isikoff and
David corn were reporting on sources who
tell us all this stuff that was in the
dossier which had been planted all
during the August September and October
who saw her and her August first had met
with a
group at the Justice Department so there
was a feeling that Trump was different
beyond the pale you had to stop him by
any means necessary
and then he won and boy is he gonna find
out what's happened to us what we were
doing eleven loved Evelyn Farkas at DoD
said we were really worried to get
everything spread it out so he couldn't
stop just what we found out coming out
but the methods we use to surveil so
there was that that issue that Russia
Russia Russia caused Hillary wasn't that
she went into Georgia and Arizona which
they had no business wasting her
resources it wasn't she was a lousy
candidate it wasn't she said some of the
stupidest things in political history by
deplorable Z redeemable z-- you know put
you out of work wasn't any of that are
there health issues that she raised it
was because Russia was the magic bullet
that explained everything and then there
was that hysteria Jeff Sessions recused
himself and that's a long windy
explanation for not looking at the
Russia issue empirically we forget that
reset that when ambassador McFaul and
Hillary Clinton took that you cute that
red Jacuzzi button in Switzerland and we
rabbit mistranslated as read the reset
button that was a criticism of George W
Bush for being too punitive and
punishing Putin for the Ossetian version
and so we were told there was a new time
and we're not going to be tough and mean
we're gonna be therapeutic and we
started to cancel missile defense member
and then the the famous hot mic if
you'll just give me a little a demurrer
will just give me a little room during
my election it's kind of classical
collusion
then I won't to give me a little room
and then after I'm elected we can do
business how you give concessions and so
and then there wasn't much of a reaction
to Crimea there was a much reaction to
Ukraine other than disappointment that
reset had failed and so when Trump came
I think part of it was his naivete he
thought he was gonna get kind of tough
on Putin and so he could say he could
joke and say whatever he want but if you
look at as the question questioning
pointed out if you look at sanctions on
Putin if you look at arming Ukrainian
elements if you look at 3 million
barrels more a day since the Obama
administration they're being pumped and
what's that's done to world oil prices
and the connect the relations that has
on Putin if you look at the jawboning
against Merkel and Putin's oil deal it's
a pretty tough tough record and the sad
thing about all of this is that size
affect the left and Democrats used to
always say we have to be realistic about
Russia that's all out the window now
they've become unhinged by Russia but I
don't want to quote into Kissinger more
than once in in a meeting but remember
he said something to effect his memoirs
that it's a pillar of US policy that
China should be no closer to Russia then
we are and Russia should be no closer to
China than we are in other words there
are elements in dealing with China's but
he said that when Russia was the
dominant partner in China was weak but
it's applicable when China's weak strong
excuse me then Russia is relatively weak
we're missing an opportunity on things
like Korea and Iran to use Russia just
because we've taken it all off the table
because to do so would be to convict on
plump and fine finally find the proof
that he colluded I like this question
few people changed dramatically after
say 65 years of age Trump did not seem
to be a conservative for his first 65
years what is your view did he change
did he hide his conservatism was the
perception wrong or is it something else
it's a very good question part of it I
think was just utility when he looked at
that field he wanted to be present for a
lot of reasons but when he looked at
that field I don't think there was any
way that he could run and the Republic I
think he understood that a third party
candidate had never won the president
never would will win the presidency and
then he realized that he had to be
conservative but that that past liberal
strain or that unorthodox train or
whatever he was I think he's changed
party affiliations a number of times
might be of advantage in winning this
Reagan Democrat white working-class
deplorable 'he's silent majority who
were getting a little bit upset with
Republican orthodoxy and so I think he
he thought that he could blend his past
with his present in a way that would be
acceptable to Republicans but would
entice other voters that the Republicans
just had not been able to win and then
he in some ways even his official party
affiliation or what he said was not as
important to the in the manner they said
it he was basically also saying I'm not
a Marcus of Queensbury Republican
anymore I'm not gonna do like John
McCain and take Reverend right off the
table the first day of the campaign I'm
sorry if Candy Crowley had to grab that
microphone and the second debate as she
did with Mitt Romney in front of Trump I
think he would have got a Ronald Reagan
on response out of him
so there was a deep-seated feeling that
among Republicans not just the
deplorable but establishment that the
Republicans had been planed by a
different set of rules at least since
Lee Atwater who was kind of a tragic
hero and sense of a very establishment
Terry and George Bush wanted to beat the
caucus he was behind by 17 points in the
convention he brought in me out water
we got the Willie Horton ad that Boston
Harbor ad the tank ad and when he got
done with him he won and then of course
he out water died very quickly but
whether he didn't want to ever do that
again and soil himself as he might put
it or whether he didn't have out water
his campaign against Bill Clinton was
not like the one that he waged against
Dukakis Bill Clinton waged a campaign
against bush and a mattr Bush had waged
against
caucus and Republicans got the
reputation that they would rather lose
nobly than win ugly at the presidential
level and Trump all you could that were
not doing that would be resonate I think
it did another good question one of the
top factors that may destroy the United
States from within or undermine us from
within and the questioner just lists
things like socialism or racial conflict
that sort of things social rah yeah as a
historian I try to ask myself what what
undermines successful projects and one
of them of course is debt and you can
always see that as numismatist by the
debasement of the currency you know what
it shows you is that people are not
producing goods and services at that
level if they're expending them we have
a $22 trillion dollar debt and I think
Donald Trump thinks that he can get
through the 2020 without a 5% cut do you
want Mike but he's gonna have to address
that
that's a nonsense a non sustainable
project another thing is we're one of
the only multiracial countries in the
history that's made it so far Austria
Hungary Rome made it for a while but
there's no evidence in history that
identity politics balkanization and a
society in which your primary
identification is your race works in a
multiracial society you have to have a
common cultural shared culture shared
culture and you also have to have the
idea that your outward appearance is
secondary not essential to who you are
and I'm afraid that we're regressing on
that when Rome got to the point where
legions up on the Rhine River did not
speak Latin very well and they felt that
they had more in common with German
tribesmen on the other side of the river
and when there
order to go down and fight in the Atlas
Mountains across and they didn't want to
leave they will then you could see what
was going to happen very easy so
multiracialism is is a is in sensual if
you're gonna be a multiracial society
that have an integrated assimilated
population room yet is another one
corruptions another one but where will
you be start without we see it in the in
the lower numbers untrust in just about
every societal institution one question
here is the prudery of the right with
regards to Trump's tweeting real or is
it a manufactured issue is it sincere
the their their Victorian style yeah you
know a couple thing I don't like I wrote
one column one scorn why can't he hang
up his Twitter gloves and as a boxer say
I won and put him in gold and retire but
that was kind of a foolish thing to
write because he's still president and
he's his approval rate is just about
world was when he got elected so he's
whatever it is but I think we miss a
couple things about that I I did about
the Twitty and I tried to we address
that in the book that's it for all of
his obnoxious tweeting if you notice
that they're mostly with territory that
even John McCain in his worst moment
when he we he shouldn't have said
something quite main that he that he
wishes that he had captured somebody
rather than be captured that was by the
way stolen from the movie Patton which
was a verbatim transcript in the movie
of what speech speech Patton gate to his
own force you didn't what ever won a war
by getting killed or getting wounded or
getting captured you do that to the
enemy
and that's what Trump I think saw on TV
but we forgot that that occasion was
prompted by John McCain saying a very
mean thing he said Trump has brought the
crazies out of the woodwork : Kaepernick
had said something just just he small it
had said something about Trump
so when he gets in these back-and-forth
these
these scans are horizon he sees people
who have attacked him and then he
calibrates very quickly do they have 51%
approval or not and if it's a question
or their there's people getting tired of
the person who's that he attacks and he
goes nuclear on them he attacks more
he's not proportional he believes a diss
portion about disproportionality is
advantageous and that they usually work
it and I can't think of anybody who's
got in a Twitter war with him who came
out better for and it's almost as if
he's saying I'm gonna bring you down
into the wrestling mat and I've already
been in the wrestling mat physically you
have it and if you want to come down
with me it didn't bother me I've been
there before
and he actually physically has but they
don't seem to they want to start
something but they don't want to go down
and finish it with him and so he's he
called that the new the new presidential
but again if you compare some of the
things that we know from the early
founders and what people said about
Lincoln and it's not it's not new it's
not at all new droid upon your class
assess tradition its Trump a good
example of Machiavelli's Prince well he
has I think that I think I said in the
book once I I made a direct comparison
with Hillary and he she she was
considered educated and well-prepared
and yet she had no insight he was
considered sloppy and temperamental and
loose with the facts and truth but he
had an animal cunning and prescient and
he and I I did when I wrote the book
read I think for those books the art of
the deal they are to come back you can
be a million or whatever that
billionaire and it's almost true to
script the and a lot of its out of not
Machiavelli whether knowingly or not if
you go into a room and you want to cut a
deal have in your mind what you think
success is if it's fifty two percent
then you demand ninety percent and then
you wait and you and then you act crazy
and loud
and you make the person feel
uncomfortable and then when you walk out
of the deal you have to walk out of the
deal if you don't get your 52 percent
but you never insult or you never defame
the person to such a degree that he's
not able to call you back up so when
people said we hear this all the time he
said a nice thing about this monster Kim
what he's maybe shouldn't have said it
but what he's doing is he doesn't want
to say something about a Chinese or
Korean Lhuillier that precludes for
their discussion which might lead to a
deal which is might be advantageous for
his country and there's a lot of
machiavelli in that Machiavelli is said
also don't get on the wrong side of
generals and he seems to be he brought
three of them in for a while so yeah so
anyway yeah um Oh ask the question
hearing you mentioned the generals for
more broadly than that in the book you
can repeatedly come back to some of his
so the quality of his appointments at
the cabinet level and so on and to the
to the bench any reflections on that
relative to the kind of people that he
might be attracted to to nominate and
appoint versus maybe some of the other
sixteen and they were in that room I
think when he came into office remember
the first president without military or
political experience and he had
alienated the establishments of both
parties so this city has this revolving
door of wise men Council on Foreign
Relations in New York workings previous
think tankers Georgetown professors that
grew usually then steps forward and says
I want to help the new president and
makes the necessary adjustments but this
group had signed so many petitions and
it's everybody was on record that he was
a monster a buffoon so they had had
lemonade themselves in consideration and
that's the right not the left that he
really didn't have people but he did
have two margins of adjudication that he
thought he'd always could rely and he
really admired military leaders and
business people who me so he brought in
three generals and he brought in
people like Rex Tillerson and then I
think he discovered very quickly I don't
think this is true by the way in the
case of Kelly or McMaster as much maybe
it's Jim mattis but he did he discovered
very quickly that many of the people
that he brought in that he's so
respected because of the military or
business experience did not share that
popular strain of his agenda we saw that
in the 2018 September 5th
anonymous with a datoria New York Times
were a high official with Trump
basically declared war on Trump said our
duty is not to enact what he wants so I
think what he was stuck with then that
was he had a lot of people who said this
is what Trump really really wants to do
according to my opinion and even if he
doesn't really really want to do I think
he should do it so I'm going to push him
and we got that adults in the room
stereotyped but now I think what he's
decided is he with Bolton and Pompeyo
and bar probably and others I think he
found people who whatever their own
personal choices are they realize that
he has a an agenda or vision and that an
agenda and vision is not Knut's and even
if it's not a hundred percent there it's
their duty to enhance that agenda and so
I think he feels come or comfortable
with people around him and that's not to
deprecate
HR McMaster at all I think he's a
wonderful person I think he tried to
enact that agenda but I think for
boldness it will be easier to do and the
same thing is true I think Pompey is
doing a wonderful job
are there historic parallels between the
standoff between the United States and
China today that is a country seen as us
to teach a competitor by the national
security establishment but deeply
entwined with the global economy well
when you say the word economy it was
probably not invented to the the
abstract recognition there isn't
- very lately probably the 18th century
but there's surely a notion that a great
power creates rivals and creates threats
and yet if you get in a war with it and
I'm thinking mostly the 18th late 18th
century in early 19th century rivals
between Napoleon and written and when
Poland thought he could take on the
British Empire because it essentially
had no land army and he could take
pretty much prefigured Hitler he could
take over the entire Moscow to the
Atlantic ocean land continent and
thereby alienate Britain but he didn't
quite understand the relationships of
Commerce the New World the importance of
sea power the way Hitler didn't
understand sea power and air power and
so what I'm getting at is that Trump
feels that something has to be done
about China now before according to the
Chinese Communist Congress you know 50
years they'll take over but to do so
require will require a level of
disruption and by that I mean there are
people in the United States who had
factored in stagnant middle-class wages
and that would be acceptable they
thought because Chinese cheap
importation had lowered the cost of real
goods from tennis shoes to television
sets that the middle classes could
afford without rising wages because the
real cost was getting lower each year
and that was because China was accepting
maybe not very little profit or not very
much profit at all in these products and
when we were told yeah they're doing
that to grab my market share and they're
gonna get wealthy sometime and then the
price will go up we didn't believe that
and so when people criticize his China
policies and they say well this is he
used the taboo T word terror the answer
is if you believe China's an existential
threat in trade and cheats as a six
hundred and fifty billion dollar surplus
it's the second largest world accounts
plus it's violated every element of
world commercial protocol what what
exactly do you have to force it to be
nice
other than a tariff or other than
military force
I'd rather have a tariff for a while and
take the hit and try to invade the
Spratly Islands but people seem to think
why did he have to do this they complain
about China espionage or China
technological appropriation they said we
got to have a stop but no but no
president ever stopped it and in fact it
was worse than that they their idea was
that we're all from Tiananmen Square on
Tiananmen Square was just a speed bump
and the wealthier China got at our
expense then the more liberalizing they
would become and their consumer class
would sort of want to all go to Stanford
and they'd all want to make China into
Carmel and that didn't happen and yet we
were supposed to put up with all these
asymmetries for that to happen and you
know we got in this mindset that after
World War two when the world was there
was no competition from France or China
or Japan or Russia and Britain went
socialist and we had this monopoly on
goods and services and because that we
can pay any price and do anything on
trade or go global leadership or Vietnam
Korea intervene and we're always so
wealthy and powerful and what happened
was we were but there was a large
element of the population mostly in the
interior who said we inordinately pay
for that with blood and treasure or
we're not getting the benefits of
globalization or why do you worry more
about those people than us whether you
agree with that idea or not I think
Trump did did tap into that people
getting close to the end here and I want
to ask final question yeah in the
beginning of the book you make reference
to how you have never actually met the
president yeah if you were to meet with
him what would you most want to convey
what would you like the meeting to
address in terms of the things we've
talked today and anything else well I
think I'd say I hadn't thought that but
I think I'd probably say three things on
halsy wise I liked him to find a way to
address the debt something like the
simpson-bowles something that wouldn't
crash the economy something that would
least show and because he has a
reputation for doing things that he
promised I think that's pretty good the
other is that when I wrote the book I
didn't start out that way but I'm not I
don't want to be obsequious but I'd like
to ask him something about his health or
resilience because I can't think of a
figure who gets up every morning at the
age of 72 and then reads attacks on his
wife his children himself his career 30
years ago his looks I've never seen a
level of the two per a Schnoor vitriol
and I wonder I'd like to know how he
does it because I couldn't do it and
that would be just as a philosophical
question I'd like him to ask that and
then third I think it would be important
to suggest to him that both he and the
opposition that he incurs or abnormal
four times but the the Republic is not
in danger by that by having a strong
view and we replying to your enemies and
that nothing he has done compares the
things we've done in the past if he's
having an order a national emergency
order to build a wall then it's not
quite comparable to Andrew Jackson after
the Civil War declaring no more habeas
corpus in the state of Tennessee or a
the McClatchy papers egging on the
Attorney General of California Earl
Warren who egged on FDR to inter
thousands of Japanese not residents
alone but Japanese American citizens so
we've done things and we've made
mistakes I'm not saying that he you know
how about them or they do it too but
again not to suggest that he that he
should have confidence in what he's
doing is not beyond the pale
okay with that could you join me in a
[Applause]
[Music]